The Joe Rogan experience.
But the diagnosis of addiction is really based on behaviors and can be briefly
summarized as the four CS control, compulsion,
craving and consequences,
especially continued use despite consequences.
So like, what if you're a D like,
I have friends that are addicted to golf and they just can't wait to go play
golf. What's the consequences.
Well, it might be that their spouse says, gee whiz,
why are you playing golf all the time? Maybe they just need a new spouse.
Well.
Okay. Okay. So, so th this actually comes up a lot in clinical care.
Like, to what extent is it? My problem.
And to what extent do I have to change my life? And I always say to patients,
you know, that is a great question and not one that I can answer for you,
but maybe together,
we can find the answer because the truth is sometimes it is a question of
needing to change your life. Right. And I wouldn't presume to necessarily know,
especially with cases on the border. Now,
there are certainly the border on the border of like, um, consequence,
pathological. Yeah. I mean, there are some cases where like, okay,
you don't need to be a psychiatrist to diagnose that this person has addiction,
right.
It seems open to interpretation in the world of what you would call extreme
winners, like the Michael Jordans of the world,
the people that are just absolutely completely obsessed with winning,
that seems like you could kind of call that an addiction,
but then they are the most celebrated people in all of the world. Right?
So you're T you're tapping into something that is really important to talk
about,
which is that our society rewards certain types of addictions and not
others. We, we, we certainly reward, uh,
professional athletes who have become obsessively focused on their sport.
Um, we certainly reward workaholics of all types. And again,
it's not to say that we,
we should pathologize all types of intensity
or all types of commitment to a behavior that that's not what it's
about.
But what I think is important is to recognize that the same mental machinery,
that approach and avoid behavior mediated by dopamine that is
at play when we become addicted to something,
can be at play really in all different aspects of our lives,
not just drugs and alcohol.
So you're essentially looking at this very objectively.
You're not making a judgment call.
You're just saying the same mechanism is in place,
whether it is extremely beneficial, like you are a Michael Jordan,
or whether extremely detrimental, like you're a person who's addicted to crack,
or you're a gambling addict who keeps blowing all their family's money.
It's kind of,
you're on the same human neurological pathway.
That's exactly right. It's this,
it's the same mental machinery that's being applied.
And again,
there are certain types of addictive behaviors that our society rewards,
but even in those cases,
I think it's important for people to really closely evaluate
potential, hidden consequences. And I feel like that's happening. I mean,
just using the example again, of, of athletes,
I feel like there are more and more and more,
there are athletes who are in different ways kind of questioning their
lifestyle or the things that they have to do. Um, you know,
which I think is good.
I think it's always good to look at the pros and cons basically. There's no,
there, there's never the light without the dark. You know, it's,
it's really that dialectic that comes into play really in all aspects of our
lives, which I think we need to talk about and, and think about.
We ex we celebrate the people that are extreme winners. We,
we celebrate the people that are absolutely completely obsessed with
performance, and they have everything dialed in, including their calories,
their macronutrients, the amount of sleep. They have,
the amount of recovery that they seek out, how they do it. Um,
but, but they have a massive reward for that. Right.
The massive reward is the glory of being a Michael Jordan or being a
Mike Tyson or being a sugar Ray Leonard or whoever it is at the peak of
their performance when they're on top of the world. Yeah.
There's a great deal of benefit to having
what many would just call extreme discipline? Yes.
So what's wrong with that?
Well,
what we hear very little about is when that road comes to an end and
that escalating glory and reward dries up and what those people's
lives are like after that.
And my sense is that unless they've worked very hard to cultivate other
aspects of their personality, when that dopamine trail dries up,
because they get injured or they just age, um,
then they have to contend with, you know, the come down, um, you know, the,
the dopamine deficit state, not to mention all of the other aspects related to,
um, you know, loss of identity, you know, who am I,
if I'm not this person who's winning. And of course that's an old trope. I mean,
we know that, but we don't, we don't hear about those,
those athletes after that. The other thing I would say that, that, you know,
that you point out in that description,
which I think is also key to the process of becoming addicted is the ways in
which addiction is also about controlling and
changing the way we feel in the moment,
rather than tolerating the feelings or the uncertainty of what's next
and list, letting it wash over us. So a really key,
important aspect of what you call discipline,
but which I think in some contexts might be addiction is wanting to
control what we're feeling, you know, when we feel it.
And I think this is also deeply into modern life and modern culture.
We explained that w wanting to control what we're feeling and when we feel it.
And that's what separates discipline from addiction.
No, I think, I think those are there's overlap there. So let me, let me go back.
So part of,
part of what drives the phenomenon of addiction is that
people control what they feel when, when they feel it. So,
for example, you know, um, in this moment,
let's say I'm struggling, right?
But I feel like I can get through this because when this is over,
I'm not saying I'm struggling, but I mean, if I were, yeah,
but cause when this is over, I'm gonna reward myself with X, Y, and Z.
If you go running and then afterwards you can have a slice of pizza.
That's right, exactly.
So it's the way that we bracket our endeavors with rewards.
And this is just like deeply embedded into our culture.
And the control aspect is, is,
is a big part of the addictive aspect because I'm now going to control the way I
feel when I feel it, which is a very different way of living.
If you were to eliminate rewards as a way to
shape time,
if you were to think I'm not going to do anything to reward
myself today, I'm just going to get through the day.
It totally changes the arc of, of our experience in the moment.
Watch.
The entire episode for free only on Spotify.